so I always see people wearing those
shirts that have a spiral galaxy on them
and then a pin drop that says you are
here to mark where we think the location
of the Sun is in our own galaxy the
Milky Way of hundreds of billions of
stars the question is though like how do
we actually know that that's what the
shape of the Milky Way is and where the
Sun is in it because we're trapped
inside it there's no way that we can get
out of the Milky Way to take an image of
it because that's billions of trillions
of kilometers that you would have to
travel it'd be like me plunking you in
the middle of a forest and saying map
the positions of the trees in this
forest oh but you can't actually move to
do it how we see the Milky Way in the
sky is just this band of sort of whitish
diffused light along with all the rest
of the stars so how do we even know that
the Milky Way is a spiral galaxy so all
the way back to the 5th century BC Greek
arabian persian philosophers all
consider the nature of the milky way
that diffuse band of white across the
sky and a lot of them did suggest it
could be made of many many stars that
were much further away from us than the
other ones because it didn't move
relative to those it was clearly in the
background and it wasn't actually until
1610 that galileo galilei of dropping
stuff off the Leaning Tower of Pisa Fame
actually proved that this was true he
took a telescope to the Milky Way and
showed that it was actually made of many
faint stars the light of which all
combined to make that diffused light
across the sky fast forward now to 1755
and Thomas Wright and Immanuel Kant ie
be very famous philosopher you just
casually cited Immanuel Kant both
speculated that because you saw that
diffuse band of stars in a strip across
the sky that the structure of the Milky
Way was kind of like the structure of
the solar system where you had the Sun
in the center and the planets going
round it but instead here at the Milky
Way you just had a lot of stars all
going around the central object and that
those stars were all rotating and that
was pure speculation and they had no
proof for that they were basically
philosophizing over it
but can also took one step further and
actually said that the other fuzzy
things that we see in the sky that
people called nebula they could also be
Island universes as he dubbed them all
of these systems of rotating stars then
by 1785 William and Caroline Herschel
are the first people to try and actually
map the Milky Way and they did that by
marking the positions of stars along
various different lines of sight when we
looked out into space now to do that
they assumed that all the stars are the
same brightness so from their apparent
brightness you could tell how distant
they were which is not a very good
assumption we know now they also were
very limited by their telescopes you
know back then they weren't great and
they also didn't understand that dust in
space can actually absorb light from
behind it so if you look in a direction
where there is lots of dust then you're
not gonna see them many many stars that
are actually hidden behind that dust so
what they ended up with was a map where
the Sun was pretty much in the center
and a very flat structure like what was
seen in the sky into the 19th century
though telescopes have gotten much much
better with the Industrial Revolution so
much so that by 1845 Lord Ross was
actually able to resolve the shapes of
those fuzzy nebulae things in the sky
and found that they had spiral structure
he even managed to show that in some of
them you could resolve individual points
of light as if they were stars
themselves giving more weight to cants
original ideas that these nebulae were
actually galaxies in their own right or
these Island universes as he called them
so this brings us up to the start of the
20th century and this is where things
start to all kick off so in 1904 a Dutch
astronomer called Katzen found that half
of the stars in the sky were moving in
one direction and the other half of
stars in the sky were moving in another
direction now that was not understood at
the time at all but eventually people
made the connection between those
results and the ideas of right and Kant
back in 18th century the Milky Way was a
structure like the solar system but it's
had a planets going round the center it
was stars rotating around some center so
in 1912 henrietta
we're studying a type of star in our own
Milky Way that we now call Cepheid
variable stars and these stars pulse in
their brightness and what she noticed
was that how fast a pulse is directly
related to how bright they are so if you
can measure how bright they appear in
the sky you then know how distant they
are and so this meant that we could
finally accurately calculate the
distances of things in the universe and
so every single distance measurement we
now make in the universe is all
calibrated on these nearby distant
estimates using Henrietta Lubitz law of
pulsation time is proportional to
brightness so that in 1917 Shaklee used
this to try and estimate the size of the
Milky Way and he did this by using what
we call globular clusters these are
clusters of about a hundred thousand
stars in these big blobs that are very
very bright and very easy to spot and to
see in the sky and so because of that
they also have different types of stars
in it they can help you calculate
distances as well and so he managed to
estimate using gobble clusters that are
also kind of insensitive to dust as well
then the Milky Way was about a hundred
thousand light years wide it's a hundred
thousand light years I endure song and
the Sun was about thirty thousand light
years from the center which he said
within the constellation of Sagittarius
because that was where the most globular
clusters were found
now that was much larger than people
first thought because of the largest
distance to a star seen at least in the
sun's neighborhood but that was because
they hadn't took into account the fact
that when you looked at the center it's
a lot dustier and so for the first time
we had a map of the Milky Way that put
the Sun not in the center in the same
year though
Curtis was observing Andromeda nebula as
it was known back then the things that
were thought to be part of the Milky Way
and in it he observed this brief
brightening of a point source in it
which he said was a nova now not a
supernova light when you have a star
that explodes and dies but I know it was
a little bit fainter than that it's kind
of a brief brightening of a new star and
so he said that no who is ten times
fainter than anything
seen in the Milky Way before so if he
used that to calculate the distance to
Andromeda you get something like 500,000
light years and that's much bigger than
the estimate that Shapley had just made
of the Milky Way being about a hundred
thousand light years across
and so this triggered the great debate
at the beginning of the 1920s you had
Shockley on one side arguing that the
nebulae were part of the Milky Way and
the Milky Way was all there was in the
universe and then Curtis on the other
side that was saying actually spiral
nebulae like Andromeda were actually
galaxies in their own right and the
universe was much bigger than we had
ever imagined now the debate was
eventually settled in 1926 by Edwin
Hubble who showed using libbets law
using the Cepheid variables that the
distances to Andromeda and other spiral
nebulae in the sky were much larger than
the size of the Milky Way hundreds of
thousands if not millions of light years
away
now Shapley originally called hobbles
result junk science until Hubble sent
him a letter with all of his
observations written down in it and
Shapley apparently responded with here
is the letter that has destroyed my
universe so through the 1930s Hubble's
categorizing all these brand-new shapes
of galaxies that we're seeing including
a lot of spiral galaxies combine that
with the fact that in 1930 Trumpler
studied open star clusters slightly
different to the globular star clusters
and they're a little bit smaller but
still under the same principles that
they're not as sensitive to dust and he
used that to actually categorize what
effect dust has on starlight and so with
that we were able to start making much
more accurate maps of the Milky Way for
the first time and therefore the idea
that the Milky Way might actually be a
spiral in the same that we've seen in
other galaxies outside the Milky Way
started to take hold
so 1940 John Orr was studying the
persistent hiss that was present on
every single radio signal sent on earth
and he realized that hazal signal was
coming from space and in particular from
the constellation of Sagittarius where
the center of the galaxy was thought to
be so he then passed that observation on
to Henry
Vanda host who then predicted that
hydrogen again the most abundant element
in the universe and therefore pervading
the majority of the Milky Way could
actually produce radiation with a
wavelength about 21 centimeters the
microwave radio regime where we've been
picking up this hiss because of two very
closely spaced electron energy levels in
the atom now that's fantastic because as
I said hydrogen is incredibly abundant
but also radio signals aren't sensitive
to dust so you can use them to see
through the dust for the first time so
by 1951 there's a mission at 21
centimeters from hydrogen in the sky had
actually been detected for the first
time by urine and Percel again strongest
in the direction of Sagittarius but what
it allowed was for Christian and Hindman
in 1952 to actually map the motion of
this hydrogen gas in the Milky Way for
the first time revealing the spiral
structure and also that the Milky Way
probably had a bar structure as well in
the very center so once you had that map
of spiral arms in the gas he then knew
where to look for the spiral structure
in the Stars and so Morgan in 1953
managed to find evidence of a spiral
structure in the positions of stars in
the Milky Way as well so now the spiral
structure have been confirmed work in
the 60s turned towards that more
interesting result that suggested that
the Milky Way could have one of these
bars structures so there's a lot of work
by people like Duvall Claus Peters and
Hamersley all investigating this bar
especially if they could find the stars
in the bar as well and so there was a
lot of debate about where that bar was
how long the bar is as well which
actually kind of still continues to this
day
so because of this through the 1970s
people were still looking for a way to
see the stars behind all of this
interstellar dust yes they'd used the
hydrogen emission in the radio to see
the gas structure behind the dust but
really what I they wanted to see was the
Stars now ideally you'd do that with
infrared light infrared light is not
affected by dust but unfortunately it's
also absorbed by the Earth's atmosphere
so you can't use a telescope from the
ground to do that no George no no George
design in 1976 so they came up with the
next best thing they were going to use
the hot young OB stars that were
incredibly incredibly bright the
brightest stars we knew of especially
bright in blue and UV wavelengths to
trace the spiral structure because they
weren't as sensitive to dust as the
cooler redder stars were and so using
that they were able to find evidence for
four spiral arms in the Milky Way the
Perseus arm the Sagittarius Carina
arm the Scouten crooks and Taurus arm
and the Norma arm also at the end of the
70s viewer Reuben was studying the
rotation of stars in galaxies and
actually found that the speed of their
rotation couldn't be accounting for how
much stuff you could see in galaxies and
actually there had to be this huge
extended halo of matter that we couldn't
see so this was the first evidence for
dark matter that galaxies are embedded
in these Dark Matter halos and the same
should also hold true for the Milky Way
and that's a completely other story
about dark matter but if you are
interested in dark matter either wrote a
whole chapter to it in my new book
that's coming out in September but you
can pre-order it now and the link is in
the description box below so shameless
book promotion aside what this meant was
that through the 1980s in the 1990s a
lot of the focus shifted towards
measuring the total mass of the Milky
Way and whether that mask the accounted
for by the amount of stars that we can
see in 1994 Hubble Space Telescope
observations by Bakkal and collaborators
showed that faint stars were nowhere
near enough to make up the amount of
Mato we needed to explain the mass
calculated by Zaretsky and collaborators
in 1989 1.3 trillion times the mass of
the sun of matter in the Milky Way
so into the 2000s we finally managed to
launch an infrared Space Telescope so
that we could see past the dust for the
first time and it meant that in 2005 the
first conclusive proof that the entire
Milky Way was a spiral galaxy finally
came through and that came from Benjamin
and collaborators who by looking at 13
million stars in the infrared managed to
show that the Milky Way had three arms
and confirmed the fact that the Milky
Way had that bar structure again so the
rest of that decade and into the 2010
the number of spiral arms in the Milky
Way was heavily debated because there
was lots of different conflicting
results some showing the Milky Way had
to three and up to four spiral arms
until eventually a lot of measurements
were combined across different
wavelengths from the radio in the
infrared all the way through to the
ultraviolet it eventually showed
actually the young hot stars that were
very sensitive to the UV were tracing to
spiral arms and then the older stars
that were more sensitive to the infrared
we're tracing another two spiral arms
giving four in total at least that's
four main arms now there are a lot of
branches and Spurs that come up those
four main spiral arms very similar to
what we see in the galaxy Messier 101 in
fact the Sun is thought to be on the
Orion arm which is one of these little
Spurs and branches so we can't put a
definitive number on how many there are
in total but it means the general
structure is agreed on there's a bar in
the center there's four main spiral arms
all of that is embedded in a very very
low-density stellar halo we've got very
few stars scattered over a large space
and then that again is then embedded a
much larger Dark Matter halo as well but
this picture could very easily change as
new evidence comes to light
such is the nature of science as we've
just heard as theories evolve and change
as new results pour in now as we look
toward the next decade the future of
this field definitely rests with the
gaia spacecraft gaia is gonna make what
we call a six dimensional map of the
Milky Way so you'll have the 3d
positions in x y&z of a billion stars
along with the velocities in those
dimensions as well so the velocity in
the x y&z direction so that for the very
first
will not just be able to get them out of
the positions but also a map of the
actual movements of all of those stars
in the Milky Way as well so the first of
these maps is going to be released in
2022 and I for one I'm so excited to see
the evolution of the Milky Way go from
this static structure that we see in the
night sky to having its dynamical nature
revealed in all of its glory captain
captain captain captain cat time captain
[ __ ] all the time is all mine all mine I
got the time is all mine John Triplette
always named cracks me up every time
just because I'm gonna have to explain
this to American viewers on it
Trump is flanked in Britain for to pass
wind only if it was a Figaro in this
science history jobs you'd be like
Galileo Galileo Figaro I can't get the
high why do I even try hey all right
dinnertime I'm so well great
you